---
layout: post
title:  open source news
date:   2020-03-07 16:08:22 -0600
categories: news
---

This article will be something rather different from my normal
postings. I’ve decided to begin doing news posts, rather than just my
ramblings. Oh, there will still be rambles, as I have an opinion on
everything, and readers might as well know the person I am, to
understand more about my viewpoint, to gauge the content relative to
the content writer.

The scope of the news will vary, but I expect it to be mostly open
source technology, relevant to the blind community. This may change,
as readers may always contact me requesting that I write articles or
news items about subjects. I will let the folks at [Blind
Bargains](https://www.blindbargains.com) chase after Humanware,
Vispero, HIMS, and other such “big names” in the Assistive Technology
world. I seek for my content to be different, meaningful, and lacking
the comedic nature of Podcasts for the blind. Yes, I do have a slight
grudge against larger sites who can dictate, pretty well without fail,
what readers know about. After all, if a blind person only listens to
the Blind Bargains podcast, or even reads their news posts, will they
know about these advancements, like retroarch accessibility, Stormux, and so on? In
any case, with that out of the way, let’s be on with the news.

# Retroarch is accessible

Retroarch, the program that brings many video game emulators together
into one unified interface, was made accessible in December 2019.
Along with its ability to grab text from the screen of games and speak
it, this brings accessibility to many games, on all 3 major operating
systems for desktop and laptop computers. No, Android and iOS cannot
benefit from this yet. Also, there is more to come.

For a detailed page on using Retroarch for the blind, see [this
guide](https://docs.libretro.com/guides/retroarch-accessibility-guide/).

# GTK 4 could be more accessible

This year, folks from GTK met with some accessibility advocates. They
came up with [this
roadmap](https://blog.gtk.org/2020/02/17/gtk-hackfest-2020-roadmap-and-accessibility/)
for better accessibility. GTK is the way some Linux apps are given
graphical representations, like buttons, check boxes, and so on. As I
always say, the operating system is the root of accessibility, and the
stronger that root is, the more enjoyable it will be for blind people
to use Linux.

I hope that this will bring much more accessibility to GTK programs,
and get rid of a lot of reasons to stick with Mac or Windows for many
more technically inclined blind people, like myself. Yes, even I have
reservations about using it. Will it be good enough? Will I be able to
get work done? Will I be able to play the game I like most? Will it
require a lot of work? At least with better GTK accessibility, a few
of those questions will be better answered affirmatively.

# Mate 1.24 brings greater accessibility

Last month, Mate released [version 1.24](https://mate-desktop.org/blog/2020-02-10-mate-1-24-released/) of its desktop environment,
which is basically like a version of the Windows desktop, handling the
start menu, task bar, and other such aspects of a graphical interface.
Mate uses a system more like Windows XP, while other desktops, like
Gnome, are more new in their approaches.

Just search for “accessibility” on the linked page, and you’ll find
quite a few improvements. This is a great sign; I really like it when
organizations, or companies, display their accessibility commitment
proudly in updates, and not just the bland “bug fixes and performance
improvements” mantra tiredly used in most change logs today.

# Stormux: a distribution which might stick around

After the quiet death of [F123](https://f123.org/en/), a contributor
to the blind Linux community, Storm, created a fork of F123, calling
it [Stormux](https://stormux.org/welcome-to-stormux/). The project is
new, and still has a few problems, but is designed to be a jumping off
point into Arch Linux, which is a more advanced, but very up-to-date,
variant of Linux. It is only available for the Raspberry Pi 4 computer
for now, and I will have a chance to test it soon. The website is as
new as the software, so the [downloads
section](https://stormux.org/downloads/) is not linked to the main
page, neither is much else. In the coming months, both the website and
operating system should see some development.

# Conclusion

This has been my first news article on this blog. I hope to write more
of these, along with my normal posts, as new developments occur.
However, I cannot know about everything, so if one of my readers finds
or creates something new, and wishes for it to be written about and
possibly read, please let me know. I will not turn away anyone because
of obscurity or lack of general perceived interest.
