---
title: "About"
description: ""
images: []
draft: false
menu: main
weight: 3
---

## About the blogger

My name is Devin Prater. I’m a 26 year old technical assistant,
Christian, gamer, accessibility advocate, blind person, Science
Fiction and Fantasy reader, and computer aficionado. I come from the
state of Alabama, where things move slow and there’s cornbread and
chicken, and football is the sport. I’d much rather eat something
quick and simple, and read, than watch sports and go places.

I grew up at the Alabama School for the Blind, learning plenty of
scholastic information, but not much about how to live. So, I’ve had
to figure it out on my own; my morality, my ideals, my way of life.
I’ve been helped by many who have taut me, and whom I now work with.
This upbringing, as well as my vision of accessibility, and what could
be, makes my content stand out among the drab, emotionless views of
other writers among the blind community.

## About this blog

This blog will contain my musings on subjects as varied as
accessibility, blindness, open source, Apple, Microsoft, screen
readers, Emacs, Emacspeak, Christianity, emulation, copyright, and
just about anything else. I plan to cover plenty, much of which
doesn’t seem to be talked about anywhere else. I know, that’s
what everyone else says, but perhaps my writings will prove me right,
or they may not.

If you’d like to contribute, please make a pull request to the [Github
repository](http://github.com/devinprater/devinprater.github.io). This
can include guest posts, article corrections, and fixes to the HTML,
Javascript, or CSS that makes the blog work. Contributions are always
welcome.

Please note that when I speak of accessibility, I am speaking from the
perspective of a totally blind person with some light perception.
Because I cannot live the experiences of a person with some vision, or
deafness, Autism, paralysis, or cognitive disabilities, I will rarely
mention accessibility in regards to those disabilities. This is not to
demean these groups, I simply do not know enough to comment or have an
opinion.

# My Projects

Below, you’ll find links to projects that I’m working on.
Contributions are welcome.

- [accessible retro
  games and emulator guides](https://devinprater.github.io/accessible-retro-games/)
- [Guide on using Emacs with Emacspeak on macOS](https://gist.github.com/devinprater/a794a448ccc46e72fca63c932105c043)

# Contact me

Email: <d.prater@me.com>. You can find other contact links below.
